.Dd February 2, 2015
.Dt schannel_listen 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm schannel_listen
.Nd establish a new secure channel with a peer
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In schannel/schannel.h
.Ft bool
.Fo schannel_dial
.Fa "struct schannel *sch"
.Fa "int sockfd"
.Fa "uint8_t *signer"
.Fa "size_t signerlen"
.Fa "uint8_t *peer"
.Fa "size_t peerlen"
.Fc
Link with
.Ic -lsodium -lschannel .
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
completes a key exchange with a peer, signing and verifying the key
exchange as required. The other side should call
.Xr schannel_dial 3
to initiate the key exchange. The
.Ic struct schannel
will have its send and receive keys locked using
.Xr mlock 3 ;
messages may be sent and received using
.Xr schannel_send 3
and
.Xr schannel_recv 3 .
.Pp
.Sy NOTE :
once this function has successfully set up a secure channel, the
secure channel should always be zeroised before discarding. The
reasons for this are elucidated in the documentation for
.Xr schannel_zero 3 .
.Sh AUTHENTICATION
If the
.Ic signer
argument is non-NULL, its length is expected to be SCHAN_IDPKEYSIZE
bytes and contain an Ed25519 private key. In this case, the function
will sign the key exchange. Otherwise, the length argument should be
0. Both of these length invariants are checked at the start of the
function, and failing to uphold these invariants will cause the function
to fail.
.Pp
If the
.Ic peer
argument is non-NULL, its length is expected to be SCHAN_IDKEYSIZE bytes
and contain an Ed25519 public key. In this case, the function will verify
the signature on the key exchange. Otherwise, the length argument should
be 0. Both of these length invariants are checked at the start of the
function, and failing to uphold these invariants will cause the function
to fail.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Nm
returns true if the channel was properly established, and false on
failure. On failure, the secure channel may not be used for secure
communications; all sensitive memory areas will be unlocked.
.Sh EXAMPLE
.Bd -literal
struct {
	size_t	peerlen;
	size_t	signerlen;
	uint8_t	peer[SCHAN_IDKEYSIZE];
	uint8_t	signer[SCHAN_IDPKEYSIZE];
} identity;

int
listener(uint16_t port)
{
	struct schannel		 sch;
	struct sockaddr_in	 sin;
	struct sockaddr_in	 cin;
	size_t			 cinlen = sizeof cin;
	int			 sockfd = -1;
	int			 clifd = -1;

	if (-1 == load_identity(&identity)) {
		return -1;
	}

	sockfd = socket(AF_INET, SOCK_STREAM, 0);
	if (sockfd == -1) {
		return -1;
	}

	memset(sin.sin_zero, '\0', sizeof sin.sin_zero);
	sin.sin_family = AF_INET;
	sin.sin_port = htons(port);
	sin.sin_addr.s_addr = INADDR_ANY;

	if (-1 == bind(sockfd, (struct sockaddr *)&sin, sizeof sin)) {
		return -1;
	}

	if (-1 == listen(sockfd, 4)) {
		return -1;
	}

	while (true) {
		clifd = accept(sockfd, (struct sockaddr *)&cin, (socklen_t *)&cinlen);
		if (-1 == clifd) {
			/*
			 * Server should report error or shutdown as
			 * appropriate.
			 */
		}

		if (clientfd > 0 && (0 == fork())) {
			close(sockfd);
			start_session(clientfd);
			close(clientfd);
		} else {
			close(clientfd);
		}
	}
}

void
start_session(int clientfd)
{
	struct schannel	sch;

	if (!schannel_listen(&sch, clientfd, identity.signer,
		    identity.signerlen, identity.peer, identity.peerlen)) {
		return;
	}

	/*
	 * Send, receive, and process messages.
	 */
	conversation(&sch);
	schannel_zero(&sch);
}
.Ed
.Sh ERRORS
.Nm
can fail if
.Bl -bullet -width .Ds
.It
The
.Ic sch
argument is NULL
.It
The socket is invalid
.It
The length invariants are not met
.It
Memory for the private key or shared keys cannot be locked
.It
A new set of key exchange keys could not be generated
.It
The key exchange could not be signed
.It
The key exchange could not be sent over the socket
.It
The peer's key exchange could not be read from the socket
.It
The signature on the peer's key exchange could not be verified
.It
The key exchange computation failed
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr libschannel 3 ,
.Xr schannel_close 3 ,
.Xr schannel_dial 3 ,
.Xr schannel_init 3 ,
.Xr schannel_recv 3 ,
.Xr schannel_rekey 3 ,
.Xr schannel_send 3 ,
.Xr schannel_zero 3
.Sh CAVEATS
